Welcome to this video on Approaches to Writing Prompts. After watching this video, you will be able to: Explain how explicit knowledge of prompt writing approaches benefits you. Relate your prompt writing approach choice to the first step in the prompt writing process: clearly defining your goal. Describe prompt writing styles and classify different prompt writing approaches by style. Compare and contrast specific prompt approaches for each style. In this video, we will discuss styles for prompt writing and specific techniques in each style. A prompt writing approach refers to the strategy used to frame and guide your interactions with the AI to direct it toward your desired response. Understanding these approaches will help you efficiently obtain meaningful responses quickly. Recall that you will have greater success with AI responses if you have a clearly defined goal before writing your prompt. This goal is helpful at every stage when using generative AI technologies. Recall that defining your goal is the first step in the prompt writing process. Clearly understanding the purpose of your prompt will help guide you in choosing a prompt writing approach and getting helpful responses that suit your needs. Throughout the course, we will continue to emphasize that critical thinking skills become more important than ever when using AI. Critical reflection of your input and its relation to the output will help you discern whether responses meet your goals. The different styles for prompt writing include 1. Information retrieval 2. Analysis and reflection 3. Creative idea generation 4. Instructional guidance 5. Collaborative exploration Let's discuss these styles and specific techniques in each style. The information retrieval style is useful when you need factual, specific knowledge, or structured information. Use these approaches when you want a focused, accurate, and complete response. Prompt approaches written in this style are straightforward. Approaches in this style include zero-shot, one-shot, few-shot, and interview. Zero-shot prompts include instructions only and no examples. A one-shot prompt will provide a single example as context to clarify your desired response. With few-shot prompting, you provide several examples. Another approach in this style involves an interview-prompting approach. When using this approach, you interview the AI with a predefined sequence of related questions. This approach is useful for collecting information on a multifaceted topic. The prompt approach is written using an analysis and reflection style, assists with critical thinking, generating insights, exploring complex ideas, and reflecting on nuanced topics from different perspectives. Approaches in this style include chain-of-thought, self-reflection, and counterpoint approaches. Chain-of-thought prompts ask the AI to explain its chain of thought step-by-step, so you can better understand its reasoning. It can also yield better results because it forces the AI to follow its own reasoning rather than making associations where it shouldn't. Self-reflection prompts ask the AI to review and critique its own responses. This helps avoid hallucinations and ensures clarity and depth. Counterpoint prompts, also called debate prompts, require the AI to explore multiple perspectives or present arguments on opposing points of view. Next, let's discuss the creative idea generation style. Use approaches in this style to leverage the model's creative capacities. These approaches are great for generating new ideas and brainstorming possibilities. These techniques include role-playing, scenario simulation, and tree-of-thought prompting. As you may infer, in role-playing and simulated scenarios, you ask the AI to adopt a persona or utilize hypothetical situations to explore ideas in a specific context. The tree-of-thought approach allows you to explore multiple branching paths. This technique is similar to the chain-of-thought approach but asks the AI to consider various strategies. For example, consider potential challenges that may arise and possible ways to address those challenges. Provide your recommendation and explain your choice. Use the approaches written in the instructional guidance style when you need the AI to complete tasks using sequential instructions. These prompting approaches are best suited for structured outputs and educational content. This style of prompting includes step-by-step decomposition, templating, and guided narratives. Step-by-step decomposition requires the response to break down complex tasks into a logical sequence. Prompt templating asks the AI to respond in a standardized format. It's generally useful for repetitive tasks, such as generating customer service interactions or summarizing articles. Guided narrative prompts produce structured responses, such as a case study. Collaborative exploration, the last style we will discuss, uses evolving prompts through ongoing dialogue. Use these prompting techniques for open-ended learning, where you need to unpack an unfamiliar or complex topic. Prompting techniques in this style include conversational prompting and iterative refinement. With the conversational prompting approach, you adapt your questions based on the response to probe a point in more depth or branch the conversation based on new information in a response. You can use iterative refinement when the output contains most of the necessary information but may need some fine-tuning. In this video, you learned that Knowing prompt writing approaches will help you obtain meaningful responses quickly. Also, knowing your goal will help you choose an appropriate prompt writing style. Knowing prompt writing styles and the structure of the approaches will help you obtain the responses you need quickly. Use information retrieval approaches when you need specific knowledge or structured information. Use analysis and reflection to assist with critical thinking, generating insights, exploring complex ideas, or reflecting on nuanced topics from different perspectives. Use creative idea generation when you need to access the model's creative capacities for generating new ideas, brainstorming, or reflecting on possibilities. Use instructional guidance when you need the AI to complete tasks using sequential instructions. Use collaborative exploration for evolving questions and responses for dialogue to unpack an unfamiliar or complex topic with open-ended questions. You may use multiple techniques, but choose appropriate types to address your goals.