Welcome to this video on writing effective prompts. After watching this video, you will be able to: Name key required elements for crafting quality prompts Explain the nuances of using AI to communicate with it effectively And describe the steps in the prompt writing process Crafting high-quality prompts will help Make the AI output meet your needs, because the prompt determines its output. Always remember the AI does not think like a human, even though it may seem to. You are working with a machine. It simply mimics human language. Keeping this in mind will help you grasp the nuances of interfacing with the AI. If you use these nuances to craft the input you provide, called prompts, you will get responses that meet your expectations and more. Let's discuss the key elements for writing effective prompts so you can use these elements to your greatest advantage. Elements of a good prompt include having a clear goal, avoiding ambiguity, providing concise context, and accurately specifying your expectations for the output. First, make sure you clearly understand your goal through interacting with the tool. If you don't know what you need from interacting with it, the AI will not understand either. Remember, the AI is a machine. It has no intuition. The adage that arose in tandem with computing, garbage in, garbage out, still applies. You need to provide the AI with your expectations regarding its output. Establishing your purpose up front will guide you in writing a prompt that enables the AI to tailor its response appropriately. Establishing the purpose of your interaction with the AI leads to the next key element. You need to write the prompt clearly and concisely. Always remember the AI relies solely on the specifics you provide. Make sure you use enough words to provide sufficient detail, but temper so you minimize the number of words in your prompt. The more explicit and concise your prompt, the more likely the response will contain the information you seek. If you struggle with this, the AI can help you brainstorm the words to help make your prompt precise. This may seem self-referential. AI can help you find the words you need, but you are still the final arbiter for your chosen words. Providing the necessary specifics means you need to provide appropriate context. Your prompt should contain relevant details to compute an insightful response. Remember that you are interacting with a computer, which needs the appropriate data to compute an appropriate result. Include facts, examples, or background information the AI does not know about. Carefully examine your input to avoid subtle assumptions, making sure your prompt is free of assumptions. Consider your expectations of the output and explicitly state those in your prompt. For example, you must tell the AI if you want the response to contain a particular structure, tone, or style. Let's explore these output expectation categories. Include signals that indicate your expectations for the response structure. Consider using keywords such as "list", "analyze", or "summarize" so the AI delivers the output in the format you need. You should also provide any constraints to refine the response characteristics. If you're looking for a brief summary, state the number of paragraphs or words the output should contain. If you need a professional tone, explicitly say that in the prompt. Or if you need more details, you can also specify that. You may want the output from a point of view or based on a persona. You will get different responses if you tell the AI you want your response from the perspective of a scientist or an artist's point of view. You also may want to know the assumptions the AI is using. Always remember that AI is fallible. Keep in mind that garbage in, garbage out applies. The AI model responds to the data used to train it. If the training data isn't correct or has its own implicit assumptions, called bias, it will pass on those assumptions to you. Including phrases such as "explain why you chose this approach" or "identify potential assumptions in your analysis" in your prompt will key you into the reasoning and assumptions that led to its response. Next, let's discuss the process of crafting a prompt. These steps include, one, defining your goal, two, writing and testing the prompt, three, analyzing the response, and four, iterating as necessary. Understand what you want from interacting with the AI. Know what you want to achieve with the response it provides. Now you need to write your prompt using the key elements discussed earlier in the video. State your goal and avoid ambiguity. Provide both necessary and sufficient context. Specify your expectations for the output. Once you have the response, evaluate how well it aligns with your goal. Consider whether information is missing or if you need a more conceptual response. Do you want a different point of view? If the initial response doesn't suffice, you have a few options. You may iterate on your prompt by rewriting it and altering the key prompt elements discussed earlier. You may also continue the conversation to obtain further information by asking follow-up questions. Most AI models will build off previous prompts and responses. It maintains the context, similar to a conversation, enabling a dynamic and iterative exchange. Leveraging how AI provides responses will enable you to make the most of this technology by writing effective prompts. Using a process will help make your interactions with AI efficient. In this video, you learned that, even though AI responds in a human-like way, the old computer adage, garbage in, garbage out, still applies. You need to supply the AI with precise directions to obtain the responses that meet your needs. The elements for crafting a good prompt include explicitly defining your goal, avoiding ambiguity, providing concise context, and accurately specifying what you want in the output. The process for obtaining the responses that meet your needs include clearly understanding your goal, writing and testing your prompt, analyzing the response based on your goal, refining the output by either refining the prompt or making further queries.