There's a lot of attention on large language 
models, or LLMs, and rightfully so.
These AI models have proven to be remarkable at 
performing a multitude of AI tasks.
The question is how large is large?
Or better yet, is larger always better?
To answer that question, we will explore attributes of LLMs
and in the process I might even convince you
that there's an alternative that is better with less.
But we'll take a detour and we'll look at a very unlikely area for an example, dinosaurs.
Dinosaurs were large and had huge scale.
And one would expect that that was sufficient to ensure they did not become extinct.
However, the characteristic of large and huge scale was not sufficient to prevent extinction.
Contrast that with ants.
Ants are smaller. Yet they continue to thrive. 
And I would point to two things. Specialization
and efficiency. Now I realize, and I can see you 
at home saying, "Well, Kip, that is a very poor
analogy." But stick with me and you'll see where 
I'm headed. Let's answer the question: What is the
relationship between this poor analogy and LLMs? 
I'll answer that by looking at three attributes
of LLMs. Let's start with cost. When you talk 
of cost, the different components of LLMs,, is
the cost of the consumption of the energy used to 
train the models, the cost of compute, the cost of
inferencing. There's also the cost of the carbon 
that is emitted when LLMs are in use. But for
simplicity, I will examine two models and compare 
them in terms of energy consumption to train these
models. So we'll start with cost. As I said, we 
look at a large model at 175 billion parameters
and a smaller model at 13 billion parameters. 
And now the energy consumed to train the larger
model was 284,000 kilowatt hours. And for the 
smaller model, it was 153,000 kilowatt hours. Now,
you're probably saying "Kip, this is logical. 
Why do we even need to talk about it?" Well,
the reason I'm bringing it up is to make sure 
we're clear [that] cost is always a consideration.
In fact, I'll go further and point out that it 
takes about a 10th of CPU hours to train the
smaller model relative to the larger model. The 
next attribute that I want us to look at is that
of latency. And for that, once again, we'll look 
at two models and we'll compare the performance of
the two. We'll start with a 70 billion parameter 
for the larger model, and we'll look compared to
a 13 billion parameter model for the smaller one. 
I should add, this model is trained on enterprise
domain-specific data. Now, when our test was 
performed comparing these two models, that
smaller model performed three times faster than 
the larger model. And I think we can appreciate
that because of the variable or the scale of the 
data, obviously the response time for the larger
model would be slower than that of the smaller 
model. And you may come back and say, "Well, Kip,
I don't care about cost necessarily" or "I don't 
necessarily care as much about the latency. What
is important to me is the performance." Well, let 
us look at accuracy. And again, we'll compare the
two models. The 13 billion parameter model and the 
70 billion parameter model. So these two models
were tested on financial services tasks and they 
were tested on 11 tasks, on sentiment analysis,
classification, question and answering, 
summarization. A number of generative AI
tasks. And when the results came out, this is how 
they faired: The 70 billion parameter model had
0.59 result in terms of accuracy, the 30 billion 
parameter model had 0.57. Now, one would expect
that the larger model would perform significantly 
better than the smaller model. But because this
model was trained on domain data specific to this 
industry, its performance is relatively similar
to that of the larger model. I think you begin to 
get the picture that I'm trying to paint for you.
Domain-specific models are a consideration when 
thinking through what LLM should I use. There
is no question about the performance of LLMs, 
generally speaking, in terms of the different task
that they do. As I mentioned at the beginning, 
they are superb. However, I would like to put out
for your consideration that domain-specific 
models because of two things I mentioned
earlier--specialization and efficiency, should be 
a consideration. So let's go back to the question
we started off earlier. Is larger always better? 
Not necessarily. The question then becomes,
how do I choose which model or should I choose in 
larger model? My answer will be "It depends." It
depends on the use case that you need. You need 
it for what? I want you to take away from this,
though, is in certain scenarios, in certain 
use cases, domain-specific models will be
a better alternative. And here's why. As we 
have seen from the examination you performed,
it was equal or comparable to the larger model 
in terms of the accuracy. It performed better
in terms of that latency and it cost much less 
from a cost perspective. So when you take these
three attributes into consideration and this is 
just an example, there are more attributes you
can look at domain-specific models should be 
a consideration in terms of the LLMs that you
use at your organization. And with that, I thank 
you. If you liked this video and want to see more
like it, please like and subscribe. If you have 
questions, please drop them in the comments below.